<p>In addition to <a href="https://mf3321.github.io/2023/05/19/Numbers-in-the-Newsroom.html">Numbers in the Newsroom</a>, the other book that <a href="https://www.thecity.nyc/">The City’s</a> reporters recommended was Precision Journalism by Philip Meyer. I was able to get my hands on a second edition copy published in 1979 from Barnard. That it is outdated is obvious. That its outdatedness is entertaining, is less so.</p>
<p>It starts on the very first page, with the preface to the second edition, contentedly nostalgic for the first edition:</p>
<p>“The first edition of this book was begun in 1969 in a Park Avenue office obligingly supplied by the Russell Sage Foundation. It was an old-fashioned building with windows that opened, and I could feel the breeze from the East River and hear New York street sounds on summer evenings. The world was somewhat different then. Some of the changes that have occurred make what I wrote sound amusingly quaint today. For example, I made a big deal out of using slide rules. You never see slide rules anymore, except perhaps in a few dime stores. I don’t even know where mine is. I certainly know where my pocket calculator is.”</p>
<p>There is also the chapter titled “Computers,” which begins with a detailed explanation of how a counter-sorter works, and the helpful advice that, although “one of the aphorisms of data-processing folklore holds that you should spend at least a year working with the counter-sorter before tackling a computer… that isn’t so”. The usefully informative chapter also explains the binary system of computer programming, software, fortran and data-text programming languages, and detailed rundown of the many ways in which a computer is superior to the counter-sorter. The chapter ends with the argument, self-evident, “reporters should learn to program computers”.</p>
<p>Dated references aside, the explanations remain useful, and he covers it all: modeling, statistics, data analysis, surveys and polls, databases. Meyer was a pioneer, recognizing that an increasingly “intricate” society required more intricate tools to describe and interpret it. His radical ideal was to draw on new tools and techniques being developed in the burgeoning field of social science. Famously, Meyer used these tools and techniques with other journalists at The Detroit Free Press to investigate the 1968 Detroit riots. The newspaper would win a Pulitzer for <a href="https://niemanreports.org/articles/1968-a-newspapers-role-between-the-riots/">the coverage</a>.</p>
<p>It appears that there have been several editions of the book, with the first edition published in 1973 and the final <a href="https://rowman.com/ISBN/9780742510883/Precision-Journalism-A-Reporter's-Introduction-to-Social-Science-Methods-Fourth-Edition">fourth edition</a> published in 2002—proof, perhaps, of the utility of its contents to journalists during a period of considerable change. The desire to report more precisely (more numbers, more data) was likely one response to contemporary debates about journalistic objectivity, and was certainly encouraged by the increasing availability and familiarity with computers.</p>
<p>Data journalism has since become an established specialization. Columbia School of Journalism unveiled its <a href="https://journalism.columbia.edu/new-data-journalism-degree-columbia-journalism-school-prepares-next-generation-newsroom-leaders">Master of Science in Data Journalism</a> in 2017. Data journalism even has its own <a href="https://datajournalism.com/">domain</a>.</p>
