---
title: "ChatGPT on My Mind (part 4)"
date: 2023-08-18
---
<p>I started with fairly basic prompts. My first was “List the 5 most serious challenges facing the business of higher education in the United States”. ChatGPT immediately spat out a nice introduction, followed by 5 perfectly plausible challenges, and closed with an equally nice conclusion. Next, I followed Owen Kichizo Terry’s <a href="https://www.chronicle.com/article/im-a-student-you-have-no-idea-how-much-were-using-chatgpt">example</a> and explored the responses further by asking for follow-up information, such as “Brainstorm reasons why tuition costs for higher education in the US have steadily increased since the 1950s”, “Why have higher education institutions received less generous state support?”, or “Explain the growing public dissatisfaction with higher education.” Each time, ChatGPT gave me a long list of explanations–typically 10, but sometimes more.</p>
<p>Yet writing this kind of prompt was really no different than treating ChatGPT as an interactive Wikipedia page, so I asked it to do more; I asked it to summarize the <a href="www.mhec.org/policy-research/higher-education-research-and-policy-analysis/affordability-and-finance">article</a> "Drivers of the Rising Price of a College Education" written by Robert Archibald and David Feldman and published in <i>Midwestern Higher Education Compact Policy Report</i> in August 2018. This was a 17-page article, publicly available, that I had found via Google search. I guess it would’ve taken me at least half an hour to read and process the ideas. In less than a minute, ChatGPT offered me 9 key ideas along with a nice intro and a nice conclusion. Improved use, but I could clearly still get ChatGPT to do better.</p>
<p>I followed the examples in Trey Popp’s <a href="https://thepenngazette.com/alien-minds-immaculate-bullshit-outstanding-questions/">article</a> and wrote this prompt: “Write approximately 500 words describing the three most serious challenges facing the business of higher education in the United States. Provide support for why these are the three most serious challenges. Include possible solutions to meet those challenges. Write for higher-education professionals. Write as if the text will be published in The Chronicle of Higher Education. Use examples. Make it concise.” The output was decidedly more interesting to read, less dry. And of course, it was as well written and well argued as the previous answers had been.</p>
<p>Even from this limited trial, I could make a few observations.</p>
<p>Next post: <a href="2023-08-25--ChatGPT-on-My-Mind-part-5.md">ChatGPT on My Mind (part 5)</a></p>
<p>Previous post: <a href="https://mf3321.github.io/2023/08/11/ChatGPT-on-My-Mind-part-3.html">ChatGPT on My Mind (part 3)</a></p>
