---
title: "ChatGPT on My Mind (part 3)"
date: 2023-08-11
---
<p>I thought I would be a better judge of ChatGPT’s output if I was already familiar with the topic. This gave me the idea of using the tool on an assignment I’d already submitted. One of the courses that I took this spring was Research Seminar. It’s a course that I would describe as preparing QMSS grads for the job market. Our class time was given over to presentations by practicing data scientists (often QMSS graduates), and our homework had us do anything and everything to make us job-ready, for example, writing our own personal elevator pitches, expanding our networks, and creating a portfolio. ChatGPT seemed the perfect tool for one particular assignment from this course:</p>
<blockquote>One key to making an impression in your career is to be able to speak to the main challenges that your field faces. Pick a given field you are interested in, do some research – so that you can explain 3 challenges that it faces and then suggest potential solutions to those challenges (especially, if the solutions relate broadly to the type of thinking done in QMSS). Total page requirement: 2.5 pages.</blockquote>
<p>When I did the assignment, I obviously chose the field of higher education. While I read <i>The Chronicle of Higher Education</i> regularly, I still had to do additional research, which meant a combination of Google and <a href="https://clio.columbia.edu/">CLIO</a> searches. I then spent the greater part of a Saturday writing and rewriting. In total, I probably spent around 12 hours on the assignment and it is far from the best thing I’ve ever written. Rereading it now, I see that I clearly wanted to explore the <i>cost</i> reason further, but didn’t pursue it, resulting in a somewhat lopsided organizational structure. I distinctly recall that at some point, I felt I had worked on this assignment in excess of what was being asked / what the assignment was worth, and I needed to just finish it off as quickly as I could. That impatience is evident in the last paragraph.</p>
<p>Could ChatGPT do better? You won’t be surprised that ChatGPT’s essay did not suffer from lopsided organizational structure! The essay it generated seconds after I entered my prompt was perfect. Devoid of any personality, but perfect. As impressive as it was, however, this was merely as advertised. That’s not why I was here; I already knew ChatGPT could do this. I was here to explore how to write good prompts.</p>
<p>Next post: <a href="https://mf3321.github.io/2023/08/18/ChatGPT-on-My-Mind-part-4.html">ChatGPT on My Mind (part 4)</a></p>
<p>Previous post: <a href="https://mf3321.github.io/2023/08/04/ChatGPT-on-My-Mind-part-2.html">ChatGPT on My Mind (part 2)</a></p>
