---
title: "ChatGPT on My Mind (part 1)"
date: 2023-07-28
---
<p>This spring it seemed like all anyone could talk about, write about and read about was ChatGPT. It’s not the first time that the media has lost its composure over what artificial intelligence can do. Coverage of IBM’s Deep Blue beating Russian chess grandmaster Garry Kasparov in 1997 made the front pages of major newspapers, with dramatic headlines and descriptions of defeat, such as that of the<a href="https://timesmachine.nytimes.com/timesmachine/1997/05/12/066265.html"> New York Times</a>, which reported that the computer had toppled Kasparov in brisk and brutal fashion, unseating humanity, or that of the <a href="https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/tech/analysis/kasparov/kasparov.htm">Washington Post</a>, which reported that Kasparov, in a stunning showdown between man and machine, proved no match for computer. Similarly excited reports appeared a little less than a decade later when Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo beat South Korean world champion Go player Lee Sedol in 2016. Lee’s retirement from professional play three years later, motivated specifically by the AI’s invincibility, added even more.</p>
<p>Yet, whereas those instances elicited a sense of wonder, the performance of ChatGPT provoked a deep sense of dread. One of the first pieces I read about ChatGPT was NYTimes tech columnist Kevin Roose’s <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2023/02/16/technology/bing-chatbot-microsoft-chatgpt.html?smid=url-share">account</a> of his disturbing conversation with Microsoft Bing’s chatbot. As a former translator, I’m very familiar with how the media enjoys telling the story about humans losing in the race against machines since it was a story often told about translation. That story was always an oversimplification; technology would never replace human translators. What it can do is change the work dramatically. The most successful translators combine their knowledge and expertise of both language and technology. This experience shapes my attitude towards ChatGPT, or at least my attitude as a worker. ChatGPT is simply a tool to be mastered. Of course, that leaves some mastering to do…</p>
