---
title: "How did I get here? My past"
date: 2023-06-16
---
<p>How did I get here? The truth is, this is not where I imagined I would be (not that I’ve ever made careful plans). First, my past.</p>
<p>I worked for over a decade as a professional translator in the French Caribbean. My then husband had been posted to the island of Guadeloupe, and I followed. Given that the local unemployment rate idled in the double digits, I opted to launch my own business. I grew my roster of clients to include major cultural and economic institutions, and dozens of small businesses—this in a highly insular place, at a time of strident nativism. I succeeded because I delivered a superior product with the utmost professionalism; I also worked very hard. I eventually earned certification in the United States (15% pass rate) and was named to official courts’ lists of sworn translators in France. I also made contributions to my profession through translator associations on both sides of the Atlantic, promoting best business practices and continued professional development.</p>
<p>My interest in translation was initially piqued by a job advertisement in <i>The Economist</i> magazine for the UN’s chief of translation. Having completed my undergraduate degree (double majoring in economics and French) I was at a loss as to what to do next. As a first-generation college student, I didn’t know that I ought to have spent my previous three summers at internships trying on for size possible careers. I had spent them instead at ordinary jobs to help pay my tuition. When I saw that advertisement, I felt inspired. International development would be the destination and translation would be the vehicle. I would combine the knowledge and skills from my two areas of study, in service of a greater good. Later, I would be especially proud of translations I did for the European Union and for the World Bank.</p>
<p>Indeed, my favorite economics classes had been development economics and labor economics, areas in which the ubiquitous curves of supply and demand were most illustrative of the subject’s power to improve the lives of individuals and of society as a whole. I thought of economics as the economist Kenneth Boulding described it, as a “moral” science. The way in which economics could find solutions and explain the world had also always appealed to me: when governments choose guns over butter; what the market can and cannot do; how opportunity often has a cost.</p>
<p>Tragedy can force dramatic changes in the trajectory of any life; yet in those changes resides opportunity. I chose to exit translation upon the dissolution of my marriage, ending that career on a high note: translation of a massive 115,000-word manuscript on state building in Palestine. I sought out employment at Columbia University as a place of achievement, new opportunities and ambitious goals. This is where I am now.</p>
