---
title: "ChatGPT on My Mind (part 2)"
date: 2023-08-11
---
<p>Long before mastering a tool, you must first learn to wield it. A lot of the media coverage about ChatGPT highlighted the clever, entertaining things it could do–likely because that makes for a fun read. Seeing these examples, I was certainly impressed, but I felt no compulsion to use the tool myself. Although I wouldn’t call myself a Luddite, I am definitely not an early adopter. More than that, I could not help but feel that ChatGPT came with a vague sense of cheating (work averted) and of being cheated (forfeited opportunity). Nevertheless, I soon felt the need to get over my hesitance. I believe in the prognostications that such tools will become ubiquitous, and as such, believe it necessary to have a minimal level of competence. Two articles published this spring really informed my thinking.</p>
<p>The <a href="https://www.chronicle.com/article/im-a-student-you-have-no-idea-how-much-were-using-chatgpt">first article</a> was written–to my surprise and delight–by one of our own students, Owen Kichizo Terry, and published in The Chronicle of Higher Education. The title of the article tells it all: <i>I’m a Student. You Have No Idea How Much We’re Using ChatGPT. No professor or software could ever pick up on it.</i> He details how undergraduates are <b>all</b> already using ChatGPT and explains how students actually use the tool, not by using it to complete their assignments wholesale, but piecemeal, for example, asking ChatGPT to propose an essay topic, to enumerate arguments, or to create a logical structure. This made a lot of sense to me. Our kids are too smart, too ambitious to simply copy/paste an answer. Rather, it is one more thing they do to do more, and do it faster. It's a well written piece, with a clear voice. Terry doesn’t reveal whether he’s asked ChatGPT for help, but I like to think he’s done the work himself.</p>
<p>The <a href="https://thepenngazette.com/alien-minds-immaculate-bullshit-outstanding-questions/">second article</a> is by Trey Popp, the senior editor of The Pennsylvania Gazette, the University of Pennsylvania’s alumni magazine (which we inexplicably receive in our office). <i>Alien Minds, Immaculate Bullshit, Outstanding Questions</i> is a great piece, and one of the best I’ve read on the topic. Part of the reason is that it is long-form journalism (with a word count of close to 9,000), and Popp has been given the space to truly explore, explain and discuss. He’s also interviewed many professors at UPenn who are thinking hard about what ChatGPT means for their students, teaching, research. Both articles provided concrete examples of how ChatGPT should be used. That is, how to write good prompts that will produce the most useful output. This was what I needed to start playing around with ChatGPT on my own.</p>
