Shortly after finishing Erica Thompson’s <a href="https://mf3321.github.io/2023/04/07/Escape-from-Model-Land.html">Escape from Model Land</a>, I picked up Dan Bouk’s <a href="https://www.shroudedincloaksofboringness.com/democracysdata/">Democracy’s Data: The Hidden Stories in the U.S. Census and How to Read Them</a>. Bouk has an interesting background, having studied computational mathematics before earning his PhD in history. Somewhat naturally his area of scholarship encompasses both, “the history of bureaucracies and quantification,” as he describes. The US Census seems to fit that description perfectly. 

Quantification of the American people has always been a serious business, for “...in the United States, the census and democracy are intimately intertwined. The numbers the census churns out represent ‘the people’ to the government, and they shape the political representation those people enjoy. As long as the people to be counted have a significant say in what matters and how the numbers will be used, then the census overflows with democratic potential. As long as the people control their own enumeration, then the quest to count each person is one of the purest expressions of democratic values.”

But Bouk is interested in more than just the numbers. The numbers are only part of the story, and possibly the less interesting part. What he really wants to know are the stories, the places, and the people behind those numbers. For example, the story of how economic and business interests were what drove major changes to the modern census, to quantify “Americans’ incomes, their purchasing power and their standards of living… [signaling] that the US was no longer a land dominated by propertied wealth, feudal relations, family enterprise, or mass enslavement [but] a land of wage workers.” Or the story of how a poorly designed census sheet gave rise to the belief of mass insanity among newly emancipated Blacks. Or how Mexicans fought to eliminate the “Mexican” category because citizenship was tied to Whiteness. Or how the Census Bureau sought to tabulate information for Japanese, German and Italian origins and ancestry after the US entered WWII, to ensure relevance and funding for the Bureau.

For Bouk, the stories don’t just provide color and interest, but serve as a reminder that “no amount of effort can remove or even accurately quantify the profound uncertainties that plague something as complex as a census…[and the reason why] it is important to tell the stories behind the numbers alongside efforts to quantify the errors within them. The stories and the numbers highlight the errors and inequity that trouble democracy in the United States.” Like Erica Thompson, Bouk advocates a thoughtful use of data, one that doesn’t “focus just on the numbers at the expense of the processes and systems and people behind them.”

Bouk’s book is full of interesting tidbits related to the US Census. He shares, for example, how  Herman Hollerith invented the electronic tabulator and punch cards (precursor to the computer) while working at the Bureau. A surprising tidbit is how the US Census has inspired a painting, <a href="https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/10423">Taking the Census</a> (1854), by Francis William Edmonds’, and the poem <a href="https://allpoetry.com/Madam-and-the-Census-Man">Madam and the Census Man</a> (1944) by Langston Hughes, both portraying the encounter between enumerator and enumerated. 

An interesting read, even if his writing style is not to my taste.
