---
title: "What I'm Doing"
date: 2023-07-14
---
<p>As a part-time student, I can take a maximum of two courses per semester. In my first semester at QMSS, I took Data Analysis for the Social Sciences, an introductory course on probability and social statistics taught by QMSS director <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/greg-eirich-2541598/">Gregory Eirich</a>. For my second semester, I took Advanced Analytic Techniques, again taught by Eirich, learning to use limited dependent variable models, creating and analyzing text as data, approximating experimental designs with observation data, and modeling multilevel data. Both courses included assignments that required data manipulation and analysis using statistical software with either R or Python programming language. During both semesters, I also took Research Seminar, where we hear from practicing data scientists (often QMSS graduates) about their projects.</p>
<p>Although students are not required to have any prior knowledge of statistics or programming, I’m very glad I put in the hours beforehand. We went through the material at a rapid clip and it’s challenging to try and apply new statistical concepts while writing the code for it.</p>
<p>It’s also a challenge doing all of this while working full time. Although I have the full support of my manager and my colleagues, <b>I</b> still need to put in the time and effort: attending class after a full day at work, studying and doing homework on the weekend, using up any and all downtime to devote to data.</p>
<p>Work typically slows over the summer. I’m taking advantage by spending some time with our DataGroup, doing an internship of sorts. I’ve been getting hands-on practice with SQL and Columbia’s databases. From this experience, I can see how intimate knowledge of a database’s characteristics is a prerequisite to extracting useful information from that data. This amazing opportunity is made possible by the head of our DataGroup, who has been incredibly supportive since I sent him an email just after new year in 2021 asking to chat about data. As much as my progress depends on my own perseverance, it also depends a great deal on the help I get from others.</p>
