---
title: "Escape from Model Land"
date: 2023-04-07
---
Erica Thompson’s Escape from Model Land kept me company over a few weeks at the start of this year. The book is a warning against the unthinking use of models, for models have many limitations: their inability to consider the unquantifiable, their built-in attributes of (over)simplification and narrow perspective, and the conditionality of any and all conclusions. Thompson likens these limitations to actual borders, christening the territory within as Model Land. And yet these limitations are not a model’s most dangerous defect. What is most dangerous is how models are taken to be objective truth, since (it is reasoned) they are the products of computers, mathematics and quantified procedures, and “confined to a scientific area of facts, data and possibility.” Yet models are hardly literal representations of the real world. “To take a model literally,” a Nobel prize-winning economist said, “is not taking a model seriously.”
To explain, Thompson variously presents models as metaphor, models as caricature or stereotype, models as perspective. In fact, Thompson explores in detail the idea that models represent a very specific perspective. Every step of data collection and model creation involves choice, and therefore values. “For this reason, I think a primary challenge for 21st century decision-making is learning to curb overenthusiasm for mathematical solutions…[since] mathematical descriptions of the world… are inevitably incomplete and…that incompleteness itself has ethical as well as practical consequences.” 
Despite modeling’s defects and dangers, models remain powerful tools to aid decision making, sometimes in ways that are unrelated to their content. Models have utility as guides and aids to thinking; as an impetus for a decisive course of action; as boundary objects, between different fields and areas of expertise; as “tools of social persuasion and vehicles for political debate.” This is a well written and immensely readable book.
